foreign
rule of thumb is like go for the joy
like I don't want the resistance to
change how can I meet it most joyfully
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
[Music]
today we're leaning into resistance how
it shows up in all its forms the path to
developing a healthy relationship with
the resistance and all the fun and foils
we can expect along the way
in self-discovery practices there's this
idea that the path to deeper freedom is
to go through our resistance
this often sets us up with an
adversarial relationship to our
resistance as if all it does is
needlessly hold us back
the other day I read an essay by David
White on the word denial I highly
recommend giving the entire essay a read
we'll link to it in our show notes but
his closing lines really caught my
attention
to live in denial is to be in very good
company denial is the crossroads between
perception and Readiness to deny denial
is to invite Powers into our lives we
have not yet readied ourselves to meet
so Joe David's treatment of denial
rhymes with something you say a lot
which is if you can't love the thing
love your resistance to the thing
if denial is one form of resistance
seeing it in this light seems like a
good pointer toward learning to love it
so what exactly is resistance it's an
interesting thing what David White is
saying I think it's an incredibly
profound and I think it needs to be said
because
It's usually the relationship people
don't have with denial right so it's
typical that people are like you're in
denial they're not like oh cool you're
in denial
it's just something that you don't hear
and so
you know from the perspective of um in a
war with yourself you always lose
like to see the benefit of the other
side to not take the other side
personally
to see the other perspective really
allows you to have less of a war with
yourself
and so from that perspective I really
appreciate
what David White is saying and I really
that that's needed often and I would
even suggest that David White also
probably say oh yeah there's a time to
see through your denial
as well so I think that the main thing
that resistance is is not
not being at peace with what is
I mean that's a great way to describe it
on an intellectual basis on an emotional
basis it usually amounts to not wanting
to feel something that's usually where
resistance
um
where it comes from in the emotional
body and then in the
in the nervous system body there's just
a there's like there is some fear there
that resistance usually comes along too
even though it might look like anger or
frustration or
but for me the most important thing to
think about when I'm thinking about
resistance is it's a natural step in
transformation
I get very excited when I'm working with
somebody and they get resistant because
I'm like
awesome this is this means we're on the
right path
and
it's their path it's not my path it's
not what I think they should do or where
I think they should be it's like
impartiality is incredibly important and
and the other wisdom of what David White
is saying is that it it's like when
they're ready so what's interesting is
we're always ready for a new perspective
or an epiphany or a
seen through something but maybe it's
not that and maybe it's not now or maybe
you're seeing through something slightly
different so no matter how wise your
Guru gets or the person you're listening
to on a podcast gets they can't be more
wise or have more knowledge about you
and no matter how wise you get you don't
get to have more knowledge than the
person you're talking to about them
or more wisdom and so it's really
critical to
allow them their paths and not want them
to be any different and it seems like it
just gets really easy to to judge
resistance like
if we're not feeling something
then we could judge ourselves for not
being ready to feel it
or we could try to make ourselves ready
to feel it when we're not that's
resistance yeah well that's like a
matter of all of that is yeah all of
that is just an uh what other like
resistance in sheep's clothing you know
or resistance in most clothing it's it's
all of that is just compounding
you know it's like you can't fight your
way out of a war how can we tell when
we're ready like if we're feeling
resistance
there must be some part of us that feels
that it's not ready to to experience or
feel this thing that we're resisting
and how how can we know if if we indeed
are ready yeah I don't look at it that
way I look at it as part of the
transformation meaning
if you watch like a cell divide there's
resistance there
if you watch a tree
you know slowly over time that their
limbs will move to find light it's like
there's resistance in that if I took all
the resistance or all the tension out of
your body it would die
it's the evolution requires resistance
it requires tension
and
so to me it it's not something like to
get in a good relationship or to get in
a bad relationship with it's just to be
with the relationship you're in with it
at that moment what are some other ways
that that shows up and uh
personally what what kinds of
resistances are there
and what leads to them mostly what leads
to the different forms of resistances
that come out
is just what you've learned you know
what what you're brought up with
so you know if checking out was the way
that you resisted feelings that you
didn't want to feel
then you check out and if fighting is
the way to resist it you know being
evasive
being defensive
um sleeping you know there's oh there's
infinite ways of becoming super cerebral
you know so there's all sorts of ways
that resistance shows up in a work in
the work that I do or just in a normal
business meeting like you you see it all
the time in business meetings you know
people having resistance
uh and then you see other people get
frustrated with their resistance right
and that instead of like oh cool so
they're resisting something what do they
know what what is it that they're
what is it that doesn't say yeah let's
do this in them and where's the wisdom
in that
and maybe only one percent of it is
wisdom and 99 of it is ignorance but
there's some wisdom in the resistance
there's always some so it's not so much
about knowing when it is good and when
it is bad or knowing when you're ready
or when you're not ready
it's really like
how do you be with the resistance
without resisting that
and let and then whatever movement
happens which is again what I think is
so brilliant about that David White poem
is it it is one very clear pointer on
how to stop resisting the resistance or
in you know what you quoted me saying
it's like how to love the resistance
if you can't love the thing love the
resistance yeah or or it seems like what
you've been describing just now is even
a curiosity or a wonder and that seems
to kind of turn things on their head a
little bit like if we if we see somebody
else in Our Lives who is resisting
something often our tendency is just to
point out their resistance and be like
like stop resisting or making it bad you
know yeah in other words change to make
me happy yeah I want you to change no to
make me happy oh yeah yeah we've all
done that yeah yeah we have yeah it's
kind of interesting to think about it
from that different perspective of just
being curious so their resistance isn't
bad
if they're experiencing resistance
and we want there not to be resistance
there then that is a pointer to our own
resistance
and there's a lot there to be curious
about yeah and there's also like this
beautiful thing is like encourage their
resistance or encourage your own
resistance like the one one way through
is to like get out of the Chinese thumb
lock and one way is to go into the
Chinese sunlock if you know what I mean
like there's
I often if I'm resisting something I'm
in that struggle I just struggle all the
way just go all the way into it and I
can exhaust the resistance it's like or
or listen to it completely let it fully
have its voice
but there's this kind of weird thing
that happens with resistances like in
some level
there's a way in which we don't think
we're gonna we have the tool the new
tool we need because whatever we're not
wanting to change whatever we're not
wanting to feel
there's a way that we've been dealing
with it that's worked so far maybe not
great but it's been working and so to
change that I was like well what's going
to happen and then the other question is
what's going to happen to me
and if you're not listening to that
wisdom if you're not listening to okay
so I stop you know yelling at my dog
every time it shits in my on my carpet
well then I'm am I just gonna have to
live with [__] you know and
oftentimes like if you listen to that
resistance you find out what tool is
going to be there or you can address it
yeah yeah this part of you is
disappearing you know this part of you
is is wanting to transform and what what
do we see comes next and
can you invite it back if you decide
that you know this part of you wants to
be back or wants to stay yeah bringing
bringing some of this back into into my
experience like a lot of times I'll
experience some resistance around
procrastination there'll be there'll be
something that I want to do
um is procrastination resistance well
there's a lot there's different kinds of
resistances in it like right like for me
I mean procrastination could I think
happen for a lot of different reasons
and I think that would be a fascinating
episode to get into yeah but for me it
often shows up as this like
fear of feeling the failure of not
getting it perfect and then there's the
resistance to my not doing it
and then there's this like there's this
fear that if I just
if I go into that resistance in the way
that you said then it'll just take over
and I'll be stuck in it but what you're
saying is like that it'll exhaust so I
could just go all the way into the
resistance rather than setting up
another opposing resistance that just
balances it and keeps it stuck yeah yeah
that that can work if it's fully allowed
to move but the question I would ask is
like on the procrastination
what is procrastination without any
resistance in it not any resistance to
it but like if you feel the
procrastination in your system and then
you feel what procrastination becomes if
there's no resistance in the
procrastination what happens well
sometimes it changes into not not
sometimes right now oh right what
happens
well
I'm not feeling procrastination right
now because we're recording a podcast
actively
right but if you if you did yeah let me
bring something that feeling yeah yeah
there's something you're procrastinating
right now yeah
yeah so feeling feeling into into a
thing that I'm procrastinating there's
just becomes a feeling of like there's a
sensation in my body of like
a little bit of anxiety
and then the anxiety kind of just moves
and becomes some kind of energy like
like kind of like Get Up and gozies yeah
and so what is that experience if
there's no resistance in it uh I mean it
feels like the impulse to do something
that's what makes me ask that question
what is what is procrastination without
resistance in it
yeah yeah it's like the the experience
of procrastination has the impulse to do
something otherwise you wouldn't be
actively thinking you're procrastinating
it exactly and you could not be doing
stuff I'm not doing stuff right now but
it doesn't feel like procrastination
but as soon as I feel like I should be
doing it well then then there's the
feeling of procrastination that comes
yeah I'm not launching a thermonuclear
missile at this moment and I and I don't
feel like it's procrastination
well then take enough then fires you
missiles
from this conversation I'm feeling that
the thing that I resist in
procrastinating is the fear
of whatever consequences of getting it
wrong
yeah and that fear if I'm not resisting
it is actually
like an excitement about doing something
new right and so now what's the wisdom
in the resistance if you love The
Resistance
what's the resistance in it it seems
like the wisdom and the resistance is
like you know I'm doing something new
and when I'm doing something new
I would benefit from being aware that I
might have take steps that have
unintended consequences and I can just
be aware of those things exactly and so
that so there's some wisdom there and if
you incorporate that wisdom into
whatever's happening that is like the
next step of the transformational
process
right so there's a step of resistance
that that's part of transformation and
then there's a step of the incorporation
or the integration of that resistance is
is also part of The Next Step it's an
interesting thing earlier I said you
know you can't fight your way out of a
war and I'm sure somebody in their
mind's like yes you can like you fight a
war you win and then the war is over but
you have to stop fighting
like if you kept on fighting the war
would keep on going
right and then this is what we do is we
layer okay procrastination which is a
form of resistance on top of resist I'm
going to resist that that's another war
and now I'm gonna like tell myself you
know I should stop having a war with
myself around
uh procrastinating I should stop
resisting procrastinating I've now I've
created a third level of fight that's
usually the bind we get into it feels
like we can get addicted to or just used
to being in that fight that's right
there's a way to look at all of
Spiritual Development I I wouldn't
proselytize this but there's a there's a
interesting mind experiment and body
experiment to do if you could look at
all of development as just
how much the fight can go away in a
day-to-day minute to minute second to
second
thing and there's an addiction to that
fight
like when I do business with folks you
like one of the things that I read when
I'm interacting with them is just like
oh how much fight is in them
and if you see somebody with a lot of
fight in them they always have
couple people there at battle with you
know like achieving goals is a is a
battle and you're like okay so if I'm
doing business with this person I have
to be completely okay with the fact that
they're gonna do battle with me or
they're gonna create a battle that I'm
gonna get involved with
and
so how much fight is in a person and
that's usually based on
how much fight they had as a kid right
how much being alive or being loved was
a battle so it seems like this is like
there's a preference for
being in you know embodying some way of
being in which we're not fighting
ourselves and interacting and
collaborating with people who are not
fighting themselves how do you hold that
without partiality yeah beautiful right
because then immediately my mind comes
to the bhagavadavita where it's like
you know the our hero
or main character says
you know I don't want to fight my
brother and
Krishna I think it is I'm gonna surely
offend somebody comes down and says now
you gotta fight
right and this is
this is there's no life without tension
there's no life without resistance you
can't you don't you don't get to do that
you don't get to transform or grow you
want no resistance you get death
the idea that you want less of it or
more of it or
is just another way to reify it and to
be in the fight how do we not use this
to justify being in a fight
yeah how do you how do you drop a hot
frying pan how do you
you know how do you describe that to
somebody how do you just not swing the
sword I need a different example than
dropping the hot frying pan is maybe
like how do you let go of an AC current
or DC current when you're being
electrocuted and it's actually making
you grab harder right yeah it's probably
that is really more accurate I don't
like it because it it ruins it ruins my
nice little answer to the question uh
see the problem with the question is how
do we do it is
like as soon as you think that there's a
way to do it then it becomes a should
and it becomes part of the battle or a
strategy yeah the strategy and then
you're looking for a result and all of
that stuff and
you're really looking to do the exact
opposite of that so if you like put in
your body like this sense of like trying
and struggle
and you feel that in your whole body and
then without thinking about it you
immediately feel the exact opposite of
that feeling
that's all that's necessary is the exact
opposite of that feeling even in your
say your procrastination
it's that there's a thousand ways to get
there
except for there's no way to get there
there's there's a thousand ways to
realize you're there there's no way to
get there is is I think the more
the better pointer and whether it's
David whites
beautiful pointing of like denial of
denial or whether it's
the pointing of love your resistance or
if it's a point pointing to just drop
the frying pan or like they're all just
pointers to just stop fighting if you
have a relationship where there's some
fight in it rather than
making the fight a problem and trying to
fight the fight just recognizing okay
there's fight over here is this
something that you know I can hold is
this is this something that that is okay
or do I need to draw a boundary and go
do something else work with different
people
and you could do that without having to
change somebody yeah I would say that if
you're in the question of that you're in
the resistance who enlighten me there's
moments when somebody acts a certain way
and it's really clear to you you're just
like oh no no that doesn't work
for me and if you want to do that like
you're welcome to but just not at me or
near me or I'm gonna go whatever it is
you know you're not changing them but
you're just you just don't allow that in
your world
and in that case there's kind of no
resistance right you're not in your
lesson or you're learning you're not in
your transformation it's just like I
know this thing for now is this way for
me but if you're like oh should I do
this or should I do that or maybe I
could do this maybe you know typically
the one that people have is should I
just draw the boundary or should I learn
to accept it you know is it more
enlightened for me to draw the boundary
more enlightened for me to accept it and
if you're in that question you are in
the transformation therefore that you're
in the resistance
now you're trying to solve it
you're trying to fix it you're trying to
make it different than what it is what
if it's not from a perspective of being
the most enlightened you can be but just
like you're making a business business
decision you're like is it better for
the business if I go option A or option
b same thing it doesn't really matter
what the end goal is when I say more
enlightened this or more enlightened
that I I'm saying that it could be which
would make me happier or which would be
more profitable or which would be
but in all those places it's where we're
in our growth we're in our
our transformation and you know like
think about the problem that you have in
business six years ago and how is like
this big oh my God what am I gonna do
and now you face that same problem in
different ways
once a month and it's no what am I going
to do it's because that you know that
whatever that transformation has
occurred when you're meditating and you
know early in meditation you notice that
you lost what track of yourself in the
meditation
you know like there's a fight I
shouldn't remember God and why am I
doing this why am I still sitting here
and then later it's there's no fight
there's just like oh yep here I am
because you recognize that the moment
that you see that you've lost yourself
you've found yourself
so you're not in that fight like that
anymore and so the so that the
resistance is that you're in your
transformation so there's a way to look
at resistance and go yay I'm in my
transformational process good for me
right it's like bumping up against our
edges yeah yeah and a sign that you're
growing but it really doesn't always
feel that way it often feels like a sign
that you're not growing yeah yeah that's
exactly it's that tension between the
two things that is the like that I want
it to be different and there's a
frustration you know even like little
kids when they're learning to walk they
get really frustrated with themselves
because they fall down not not the
beginning of the transformational
process but in it you know they get
really frustrated but what about the
resistance to the wanting to be
different itself like because wanting to
be different also has its own wisdom and
that could be something to resist on its
own yeah this is an interesting one it
kind of feels like the the like
oftentimes not that it needs to be this
way but oftentimes
when somebody's kind of beginning their
Journey
but before they end the journey they're
like yeah self-help spirituality blah
blah blah and then they're like they
want something to be different
and then it and then at some point
they're just like I don't want anything
to be different I just want to be me I
want to be
as me as me can be I want to see what I
am right and
that tran and there's like this
acknowledgment that Evolution happens
there's acknowledgment that development
happens but it's not particularly
wanting to be different it's not wanting
to improve
generally that seems to be the
progression that people go through and
my guess is it's very necessary it's
very necessary for someone to have the
phase of wanting to be different and
then it's there's this phase that's very
necessary for them to
that they they see that that level of
friction no longer serves them
that level of resistance no longer
serves them and so then they move into a
different level
and so I think it's like almost anything
that we do whether it's recording sound
or making movies or doing business the
more we do it the more sensitive we
become the more refined we become
in it and the more
the more that it's not done the more
it's done with Discord the more it
becomes unpalatable for us right so a
great musician here's something that's a
little Out Of Tune and they're like oh
and like me I'm like what attitude I
like the got a good beat you can dance
to it whereas
I might sit with somebody and notice a
little bit of tension in them that they
won't wouldn't notice for 30 years you
know or 10 years or two minutes who
knows right but the
as you do the work you become more
sensitive to the Discord
and in that the Discord of I want to be
different
it stops becoming an accelerator and you
start seeing it as a break
but don't go Rush right and I think this
is what
David White is saying is like don't go
rush and try to get to the place where
you don't where that want is gone it's
it's got its wisdom it has its movement
you know let it let it have its dance
enjoy its dance yeah a question that
comes up for me now is like what part
wants to be different because like in in
a lot of these episodes we've arrived at
this place where if you stop wanting to
be different if you let go of your like
ideas of being different you will
naturally change
you will naturally grow so there's like
there's a part of you that does want to
be different like you could look at you
know Evolution and species want to be
different they just don't know yeah like
there's just not like a knowing
somewhere of how that's gonna go right
it seems like there's like if we are
wanting to be different and we have an
idea of what different would look like
for us then we're using our intellect
which is just going to be like a limited
logicy form of it but might be great
form of it too
yeah it doesn't really matter because it
a tree is going to grow the way A Tree
Grows Right we're going to grow the way
that we grow at
I don't know correcting is this because
of my intellect so because of my mind
says so
this is the soil this is the sun this is
the this is the seed
and we grow
and it doesn't mean we give up our
ambition either which is interesting or
our will it's like the sensation is more
that the ambition and the will
belongs to something greater than us
the feeling is that it's more of a
universal will or a universal ambition
and so in in some aspects
far more gentle and in some aspects far
more powerful what do you mean by
Universal will without you know without
jumping off the Wu train you're going to
try to stop me from jumping off the Wu
train
um
I'm trying to keep you on the tracks
if it's a felt sense it's a an
experiential
it's like trying to describe
there's a moment in which
the sense of self changes in a in a kid
right so there's a point where
you ask them do you want GI Joe with a
Kung Fu grip
for Christmas and they're like yep
you're like what does Mom want she wants
GI Joe with a Kung Fu Grip dad wants GI
Joe with a Kung Fu grip and then at some
point they differentiate themselves and
they see that their mom and dad might
want something different than
what they want for Christmas
and so that sense of self develops
and it seems to get bigger like it goes
from like I am me to I am my family
even in the distinguishing nature of it
to I am my nation I am people I am the
ecosystem
and as that sense of self changes
the parts of you belong to the bigger
thing
right and you can see this all the time
where people like get lost in like I am
the nation or I am my political party
and
if they feel offended it's not just them
that are offended it's like they're a
nation that should be offended or is
projected
that way so I think it's not anything
different than that it's just that the
sense of self becomes
bigger than you it feels more Universal
or something like that it feels more
like Oneness yeah that makes sense and
it it also points to how this path can
lead to better collaboration because you
could start by this is me I am me I have
my problems and everybody else is in my
way yeah to hey we all kind of have the
same sort of problem everybody's got
their own you know position that they're
experiencing it from
and we can share and integrate all of
our different sources of information and
come up with something more complex as a
result
yeah there there seems to be
there's like kind of
levels of it that be are better with
collaboration and levels of it that are
not as good with collaboration and then
there's like middle stages that are kind
of strange so
for instance when you
oftentimes at one stage of of like
seeing the world
you might like go into consensus and
think that everybody's voice is equal
and then that obviously is like a great
way to destroy an organization there's
you know manuals of the CIA written in
the 1950s about how to destroy an
organization and consensus building and
committees and wow tell me more about
that oh yeah it's a great document
um it basically it's like a document
that was written in I think 40s or 50s a
CIA how to go in and destroy a business
in a country where you want to destroy
that business and it's like a delegate
all decision making to committees make
sure the Committees are all over six
people
and if you go into like the super
dysfunctional organizations that's
what's happening
um all the time I mean
and sometimes designed that way like
maybe Congress and the Senate are
designed to be not entirely effective
because you only want the really most
critical laws to pass
but a lot of the non-profit world is is
created this way where it's like
offending somebody or making a call
without everybody's agreement is very
bad and are considered very bad and then
they become very ineffective in their
and their work and so
I would say eventually yeah
collaboration just becomes
nature but it's the nature depending on
where you find yourself in that process
yeah well I guess it's important that
collaboration remains collaboration
among individuals with different
perspectives right rather than an
assumption that everybody is the same
and should end up with the same decision
right or has the same Authority or has
the same expertise it's like it's that
integration of
there's a great way to say it which is
that selfishness is the engine of unity
right like it's the selfish Gene that
makes the human
and it's the selfish human that makes
the human race and it's and it's the all
these selfish
you know
cells and bacteria and fungus that are
all making this beautiful Earth
so it's it's like
the interdependence is is created by our
selfishness
and it's kind of it puts you in that
same perspective of
without tension there's no Evolution
without resistance there's no there's no
transformation
without selfishness there's no Unity so
I think I can hear like half of our
audience flipping out about this right
now and good there must be ways for
selfishness to lead to more connection
and collaboration and selfishness to
lead to more resistance and you know
fight yeah and I think that that could
like that could be a way to bring us
back to resistance
a lot of the things that we've talked
about in this work is that you know in
impulse resisted turns into a kind of
contorted impulse that leads to
disconnection and a lot of the behaviors
that people consider selfish
in a bad way or in a harmful way yeah I
mean the key to being really good at
selfishness is to really understand the
underlying want
right so the first one is like I just
want to go get drunk and
you know screws many people as I can hey
that that doesn't actually satisfy you
and so then what's the deeper want and
then what's the deeper want and
hopefully you don't have to play them
all out and eventually
you find the deepest want even close to
the deepest want ends up to be a deeply
compassionate thing for the people
around you as well
right like there's this idea that
it's like I have to choose between being
good for me to me or being good to you
and I I don't find that experience I
find that when I'm truly being
compassionate with myself I'm almost
always that action is truly being
compassionate for the people around me
it seems like that also like continues
to relate to resistance because we might
think we want something that we're used
to wanting and just become really
all right we just get stuck in that
Groove and we wanted to start defending
that want because we've got we've
already gotten so invested in it and
then when we start to see maybe we want
something different that could be the
seed of denial yeah yeah or yeah don't
take that away from me or
or it becomes like the the surrogate of
something you know like
there might be some political feature
that we have that
most of America doesn't want anymore
but the transformation of it is so scary
and the same thing in ourselves like oh
yeah I don't want to be watching
television three hours every night
anymore but
then I sit with myself for the first 10
minutes I'm like I don't want to feel
that so boom back to the television
so it's it's almost like it's not
selfishness that's the problem it's it's
almost just like
undeveloped selfishness is the problem
you know that we're we're competing
against and and it's really strange that
every time I hear somebody call
themselves selfish in a session
I'll say something to the effect maybe
not every time but something to the
effect of like okay so when your parents
called you selfish what did they really
mean hmm and almost to a t what they all
really meant was I I want you to do
something different
that's what it means I've never called
my kids selfish like you know it's just
it's usually just a parent saying like I
wanted you to do this and you did this
other thing you're selfish
I'm not even sure if I believe in the
word selfishness in that way but but
what I really like is that what you're
saying is that there's moments of
resistance that will move us away from
will create an evolution in us where our
we can see more clearly what's going to
make us happy we can see more clearly
what brings us peace we can see more
clearly
what creates Harmony amongst the people
that we love
and and there's something very true
about that like one of the principles
that I live by is is Embrace intensity
and that's exactly for that reason which
is that intensity that resistance is
like I have found the more I embrace it
the more I run towards it the more I run
into it and through it
um the more I love it for what it is the
the less I resist it the more at peace
my life becomes the more loving I become
the more
generous I become
so for those people who don't like what
I'm saying great
beautiful there's some resistance to run
towards I'm not saying agree with me but
yeah feel it that kind of brings back to
like one of the kinds of resistances is
when we start to recognize something is
true that we didn't want to be true or
maybe we recognize a deeper want that
isn't convenient for us or it doesn't
seem convenient for you know people that
we're in agreements with or something
yeah so there's some of this advice is
like or like a tool is to embrace
intensity
what else can we do to recognize those
moments give ourselves the compassion
to feel that resistance
not problematize it and then Embrace
that intensity in a weird way that's
like
all the work that all spirituality and
all
psychology and all
um
Psychotherapy and all it's it's kind of
answering that question that's all it
really is is right there is our natural
movement towards
ourselves our own Evolution and there is
the resistance and the question is how
does that resistance get
met
um what's the most effective or
efficient or Joyful Way to
to meet the resistance and and I would
my kind of rule of thumb is like go for
the joy like I don't want the resistance
to change how can I meet it most
joyfully
and if you think it's like fake a smile
you'll notice that's not very joyful but
it's more to ask that question and
there's also the question of who's
resisting which is or what is resisting
that's a great question as well how do I
love the resistance that's a question
how do I find the wisdom and the
resistance all those things I think are
hacks and the one that's most commonly
not seen is what's the feeling I'm
resisting
what's the thing I don't want to feel
and go and feel it yeah which I guess in
in the case of
like procrastination or some some forms
of resistance is the resistance itself
which brings me back to
what you said earlier in this episode
about
uh just going all the way into it which
seems counterintuitive at first but it
makes more sense in this context because
you can you can just enjoy going into
the resistance and be like
okay this is what it's like to feel this
resistance great yeah with
procrastination especially it's a really
unique that's the thing each form of
resistance has its own little nooks and
crannies like for instance
procrastination one of the things that
the reason it works why it becomes like
a AC current instead of a hot frying pan
so to speak
every time you think about doing the
project you're giving yourself a
negative reinforcement so why the [__]
would you want to do it right okay I'm
thinking about the project now I'm
beating myself up for not doing it so
the project is associated with like
beating yourself up like think about it
on a mammalian level a dog comes and
every time it sees you you kick it in
the face it doesn't want to see you
anymore it doesn't want to be around you
it doesn't want to approach you yeah
every time you approach a problem you
kick yourself in the face it's like it's
like procrastination can be really
easily solved if every time you think
about the problem you then Envision
yourself enjoying the [__] out of doing
it
instead of why haven't I done that yet
right positively reward yourself every
time you move towards that thing instead
of negatively rewarding yourself and I
think this is generally the the way in
which
the AC current happens instead of the
hot frying pan right it's like that
reinforcement that occurs generally is
that we
our resistance is painful and unwanted
and we associate it with the thing
so worked with a woman once who lost her
dad when she was a child
and every time she thought about her dad
it hurts so she just doesn't think about
her dad anymore
right which is a world of denial in a
world of pain a word of unfound emotions
like a severe rigidity
all that stuff is happening
and it's all because she unconsciously
negatively reinforced herself
cause yourself pain every time she
thought of her dad yeah and not you know
cause herself suffering not like just
letting herself feel the pain
of losing her dad yes yeah so if if
we're making the distinction the way the
Buddhists do yes which is like suffering
is the resistance to the pain yeah
something that's been helping me lately
with like things that I'm putting off or
procrastinating is just
sitting with what it feels like to be
avoiding doing it which
invariably feels
less good than actually doing it even
though the perception is like oh but
doing it I'm going to feel confused I'm
not going to know what to do I don't
have the answers
but like actually doing it like like
writing something like
writing an email can be
even if you don't know what you want to
say when you sit down and do it starting
to type feels better than staring at it
and kicking yourself in the face yeah
you even in the wild wild was kind of
kicking yourself in the face like that
yeah
which is what's caught causing my smile
right now
I love not knowing what to do
yeah like and getting it wrong yeah
that's a funny double bind like I really
actually get bored immediately once I
know what to do yeah
if I have if I
if I all laid out in my head I'm far
more likely it's far more likely to take
me a little time to get to it if I'm
like oh man I have no idea what to say
here then it's more likely for me to
actually do it which just lets you know
how arbitrary the whole thing is right
like
it's just the whole thing is this
arbitrary notion of what we Define as
what feels good and what feels bad
and we Define that because of our past
history because of an idea we hold about
it
and as that stuff starts evaporating as
that as we see through our ideas like as
you are experiencing this podcast
hopefully this podcast has just
destroyed a couple of ideas that you had
that's the idea is I could just just
pummels them
and then you're like wait a second I
don't know how to feel I don't know what
to think here and you're kind of left in
that
place and and as that occurs all of a
sudden we can create the relationship we
want with it not the one that we were
taught yeah one of the ideas that I had
was like oh I've had so many stories
that I've wanted to write about my like
adventures and experiences and I've
spent so much time thinking about what I
would write and then at some point I
just never did and then the moment
passed and I'm like realizing now kind
of triggered by something you said
earlier that in a number of those cases
I was figuring the whole thing out in my
head and then eventually I knew exactly
what the story was right and then it
became uninteresting it just receded in
the background I never actually wrote it
right
because I wasn't actually writing when I
was doing the figuring out so nothing
ended up written down exactly yeah and
it's just
to tie it back to resistance this is
like the whole like oh I have this idea
of how it is you know even that can be a
form of resistance yeah you know like
just like you said at some point
becoming better the idea of becoming
better the idea not the actuality but
the idea of becoming better becomes too
has too much friction
same way this can have too much friction
as well it starts becoming
unpalatable well I definitely feel right
now like a lot of the ideas and
perceptions that I had about myself are
somewhat broken right now after this
conversation
somebody was frustrated with me the
other day they're like okay well you did
all that and like now what am I supposed
to believe and I'm like nothing this is
done stop stop trying to construct a
reality around yourself see what's there
yeah yeah I'm definitely sitting in a
lot of questions now which I'm looking
forward to getting into
tell me about a time that you like
struggled with some resistance for a
period of time and then
suddenly found a way not to do it or
just simply stop doing it yeah in my 20s
I smoked a lot of a pot I don't know if
there's a lot compared to what I see
nowadays but um I definitely had a pot
habit
and mostly it was like on the weekends
and then there's a short time where it
was like
daily when I didn't have this job and
and I man I just like
I beat myself up over it so bad I mean I
remember just like the
critical voice in my head got so loud
and I became so abusive and I see that's
now a lot with pot smokers generally is
that like depression is
over prolonged you seems to be part of
it it's like they they're not motivated
to do stuff they're
constantly
seeing the faults in themselves in the
world
um and I was just like fully in it and
and no matter how hard I fought to get
out and like it just like drove me
deeper into it because the more that I
was abusing myself about it the more I
wanted to escape myself the more I
smoked the pot right like so it was just
kind of like that was the
that was a cycle that I was in and at
some point along the line I just
realized oh what is it that I really
don't want to face
what is the self that I really don't
want to face
this is really early on in my my
spiritual journey I think just after
like my first Meditation Retreat or a
couple years I I have a bad sense of
time and I just I just ran into that I
just ran into that feeling and it it
turned out to be sadness was really the
thing that I didn't want to feel it was
just some emotions some anger some
sadness
and then I ran towards it and then pot
just became like I don't want to [__]
abuse myself like that and then it was
like oh but I I like it once a week and
I cleaned my house and then
but anyways by the time I was like
28 something like that it was like
The Habit had almost completely
disappeared and and then it completely
disappeared and I I just
I look back I'm like wait I didn't try
at all to end this thing I didn't at all
try to
stop it and and now it holds absolutely
no appeal like I look at it I'm just
like yeah no there's a you know someone
offers it to me at a party or something
and I I'd say there's just zero appeal
there's no
Temptation there's no willpower and
there's just a lack of Interest
and so the more I resisted
the habit of pot the addiction of pot
the more it grew
the more shame grew with it
um and
as soon as I looked at the underlying
thing and embraced the intensity
then the whole thing just kind of
disappeared just dissolved
without will without trying it just kind
of
undid itself
and I find that generally that's the
case
is a place where I'm in the fight
there's something under some resistance
or not resistance some um
there's some intensity underneath that's
been wanting to be embraced and what's
really interesting about that is that I
used to think that there was some rush
in that
I used to think that um
oh my God I got it yeah I gotta embrace
all the intensity I gotta
I have to fix all the issues I have to
stop all the resistance
and I realized like I spent so much time
yeah there's only so much time and I
realize it doesn't really matter if you
do it's it'll stay there wait for it'll
wait for you like
if you don't solve your pot addiction
today you it'll be there tomorrow
you know
you don't you don't there's no rush it's
it's whatever it is that you want to
transform about yourself it's gonna stay
there the problem doesn't go away until
it's addressed so you you can be patient
and that in itself was just another way
to let go of another level of resistance
another another fight in me
and the way I think about it now is like
I can't let go of resistance it's it's
letting go of life you know I can't let
go of that tension so the question is
how do I hold it
with the most gentleness and love how do
I hold without ever letting go of it
without ever losing contact without ever
losing the intimacy with resistance how
do I hold it as lightly as gently as
lovingly as possible yeah I really like
that
and that sounds like an episode
we'll see
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]